# RHD2216

[Product Page](https://intantech.com/products_RHD2000.html) |
[Data Sheet](https://www.intantech.com/files/Intan_RHD2000_series_datasheet.pdf)

The RHD2216 is a low-power electrophysiology signal acquisition chip containing 16 differential input channels each with a low-noise amplifier.
It also contains a multiplexed ADC to digitise the channels and an SPI interface for communication with an MCU.

## Data Readout

To ensure a steady sampling rate the ADC has to be fed commands at a steady pace.
One command has to be sent for every channel that should be read followed by a few dummy commands to give enough time for the results.

The firmware ensures this by programming `TIMER1` to generate the command pacing.
The overflow event is connected to the start transaction task of the `SPI3` module using the PPI.
Thus every time the timer overflows it starts a new SPI transaction.
The `SPI3` module is used because it is the only SPI module with support for generating the chip select signal.
When a transaction starts the SPI module automatically lowers the CS line, transfers two bytes with the DMA, raises the CS line again and generates the transaction complete event.
The DMA is set to list mode which ensures the DMA pointer is automatically increased to the next command when the transaction has been started.

The `TIMER2` module is set to counter mode and its count task is connected to the transaction completion event of the SPI module.
When the counter reaches a predefined value it is reset and triggers an interrupt.

All of this happens completely without any CPU interaction.
The CPU only gets involved when the counter interrupt is executed.
In this interrupt the CPU has to rewind the TX buffer, swap the RX buffer and then pass on the data to the main task.

### SPI Buffers

The firmware reserves three buffers for the DMA.
One TX buffer and two RX buffers.
Each buffer is large enough to contain 11ms worth of commands.
Every 10ms the counter interrupt is triggered.

The TX buffer contains the commands that have to be sent to the ADC.
During the first iteration this contains all the commands needed to calibrate and start the ADC.
When the first interrupt happens this gets overwritten with the commands for the data readout.

The RX buffers get filled with the results of the ADC.
Every time the interrupt happens it swaps the DMA pointer to the other RX buffer and then copies the sample data over to the main task.
Not every value in the RX buffer is sample data.
The responses to the dummy commands get filtered out during the copy process.

As stated every buffer is large enough to hold 11ms worth of data but the interrupt is triggered every 10ms.
This means all buffers have a 1ms overflow window.
When the buffers reach the 10ms mark there is a time window of 1ms where additional data can accumulate before the buffers have to be swapped.
This is necessary because the command pacing is very fast and the interrupt can be delayed by up to 250µs by the Bluetooth module.
During this time the data gets written to the old buffer's overflow area.
After the buffer has been swapped the data from the overflow area is copied to the start of the new buffer.

Swapping the buffer itself means changing the value of the DMA pointer while the SPI module is running.
Great care has to be taken to ensure that the pointer does not get corrupted by a data race.
This is managed by the `adjust_pointer` function.
It is written in inline assembler and uses the `LDREX` and `STREX` ARM instructions for exclusive loads and stores.
First the DMA pointer is loaded with the `LDREX` instruction setting the exclusive bit for the CPU.
In case of a context switch by an interrupt this exclusive bit is cleared and the following `STREX` instruction fails.
In that case the procedure is retried from the beginning.
After the load `TIMER1` is checked for a safe value.
If it is currently too close to before or after overflowing the procedure is restarted as well.
This ensures that the DMA pointer access is retried until it is safe to do so.
